Thank you.
So I'm talking about two years of Skywatch Blue,
and I'm going to try and talk a little bit.
The mic isn't picking up your voice, you said it
had something.
Oh, it fell off.
Thank you.
Let's just try clipping it to my shirt.
All right.
How's that?
Thank you.
All right.
So I'm talking about two years of running Skywatch Blue
.
And I'm going to try and impart a few lessons learned
for community labelers.
And some of these are hard-won lessons for, you
know, really anyone who's looking to maybe start a lab
eler, but doesn't have a ton of experience both with
the tech, but also I think with sort of traditional trust
and safety.
So just by way of introduction, as Nick introduced me,
I'm Julia.
You also may know me as Scoyatolo, and
I am not sure why that slide didn't advance.
There we go.
And I have been for the last two years running Skywatch
Blue.
Now, I'm going to preface this by saying that
this isn't exactly the talk that I set out to just
, you know, share, you know, when I proposed
this talk.
After this weekend, you know, talking to folks, I
've been constantly tweaking the presentation.
And if I had time following Dr.
K, I probably would have made some changes because I learned
some things during that talk that apply to some of the things
that I'm going to say.
So, what are labels?
Labels are metadata.
And this is the sort of actual definition provided
by the AT proto docs.
And it's kind of, it's a long explanation.
But the two things sort of to keep in mind about them
is that they're a form of metadata about any account or
content in the AT proto ecosystem.
They sort of exist as freestanding objects.
And they can be used for moderation purposes.
But they can also be used for other purposes.
And there's quite a few labelers out there that are
sort of novelty or fun labelers.
All right.
So I have an issue here where the slides don't exactly
advance with sort of part that has the notes.
So if it takes me a moment to move between slides,
I apologize.
So what is Skywatch?
It is a general purpose labeling service.
It's one of the largest, well, it might be
one of the largest community labelers on BlueSky.
There's no actual way to measure that other than by who
has sort of clicked the heart button on the labeler.
Which doesn't subscribe you to the labeler, by the
way.
It's possibly a cautionary tale.
And it is definitely a personal project that got out of hand
.
Hence the picture of Fred Thompson in A Hunt for Red October
where he's doing this business will get out of hand,
it will get out of hand, and we'll be lucky
to live through it.
I would also like to note, and I will come back
to this in a couple of slides, Skywatch is an
inherently political project.
Not exactly in the way you think, but in the sense
that all labelers are political.
So what is Skywatch not?
Well, Skywatch is not a community.
And this is worth noting, it is a community service
, but one of the sort of key things to remember about
Skywatch is that it started with a few dozen users in
mind.
And it grew at a slow rate until November of 2024,
paralleling sites growth, at which point it exploded by an
order of magnitude.
I guess to that end, it's also hard to say
that it serves a specific community.
And one thing I haven't cracked is what to do about
that.
If you start with an original community of a few dozen,
and now you are up at potentially 8,000 or more
users who come from maybe backgrounds that you didn't originally plan
for, it's hard to say how to serve them best
.
I also believe that Skywatch isn't a moderation service.
We're not doing traditional trust and safety.
We're also not -- we don't have takedown
capabilities.
Labelers are metadata.
You can have block lists associated with certain labels, which we
do, but block lists are soft moderation in the sense that
they don't necessarily affect -- they don't affect taked
owns.
There was a recent paper actually published, which talked about the
fact that they don't really break up the social graph either
.
And that's probably a good thing, even though the block
on blue sky is understood to be a nuclear block.
I will say that most labelers are not hard moderation.
Some exceptions would be, you know, black sky, north
sky, and of course, blue sky moderation.
So then -- by way of example, I just wanted to
show some of the labels that we sort of append to content
.
I've broken them out by account versus post.
And when I say that we're appending metadata, that
's exactly what we're doing.
We're analyzing the content in one way or another, some
of it via automation, some of it via manual review,
and then we are applying a label based on the rules and
the definitions of the label that we provide.
So I do want to, before I go on further,
go back to the notion that Skywatch is an inherently political
project.
And to do that, I want to talk a little bit
about why I started it.
In 2018, I co-authored a paper with Kate
Starbird and her team at the University of Washington that looked
at the media ecosystem around the Syrian civil defense, also known
as the White Helmets, in Syria during that country
's civil war.
And we started with Twitter.
Some of her team went on to analyze other platforms.
And what we found was that there was an active attempt to
reshape the information space through content sharing and remixing across
multiple sites, domains, and political leanings to create the
appearance of independent confirmation.
The goal was to contest the civilian status of the White Hel
mets and legitimize their targeting under international law.
Skywatch came about because Blue Sky offered a means to shape
my personal information space.
And the information space of anybody who chose to use the lab
eler, which at the time was a small handful, well
, a few dozen people.
And I think it's important to remember that all labelers
and content moderation do this to some extent.
And whether the admins of it are conscious of it or
not, we should be honest about that.
And so I've always tried to be open about my motivations
, which is that Skywatch is opinionated.
It embodies a set of values and ideas about what users
want to see on their timelines.
And so this is what I mean when I say the project
is inherently political.
However, there are a couple other reasons why I started it
.
Jerry Nerd sniped me.
So the first label was really the Blue Sky Elder label,
which follows basically the criteria laid out here.
And then next is, and content warning, but my partner
who's in the room created this monstrosity,
and it became part of early Blue Sky culture, which is
why we have a Sensual ALF label.
Yes, there are community standards, and I am trying to
live up to them here.
All right.
So you want to start a label, a labeler,
and a non-novelty labeler at that.
I think the first thing I'll say is, don't
.
If you do, you're probably someone who enjoys getting yelled
at.
You're now a mod, whether you like it or not
, even though I said we're not a moderation service.
Every label is going to be perceived as a personal attack.
I mentioned you're getting yelled at.
Which to be fair to users, we don't have,
if you're not hosting a PDS and having a lab
eler associated with the PDS, you have no way to
do the two-way communication.
You can get appeals in, but you can't explain to
people why they were labeled in a private manner.
There's no way to send them an email, and that
's a shortfall of the tooling.
Folks don't read the label definitions, except for the rules
layers, and they're always going to be trying to sort
of work you to get the rules, sort of either talk
you into removing a label from them or to apply a label
to someone else because they think it fits your definition.
And I think a lot of folks, this is getting a
little bit better, but I think a lot of folks don
't understand what community labels are and can't necessarily tell the
difference between you and blue sky.
So, one thing you're going to have to learn is
that, I'm not sure, I'm sorry, your
signals are noisy.
And there we go.
Many of your user-generated signals are noisy.
You are, to a subset of users, going to be
a gun and they are going to attempt to weaponize you
.
But, as I said before, lots of folks don't
necessarily read the labels and, as such, they're going
to submit a lot of reports that have nothing to do with
the things you label, per se.
Case in point, we are constantly getting reports of things that
people suspect are AI.
Now, they are not necessarily misrepresenting what they
are.
I discovered this morning, people had started reporting Addy.
It's just a fact of life.
And user reports are noisy.
Automation can fix some of this, but automation is also
capable of making mistakes at scale.
So there's always going to be risks inherent in either approach
.
Now in conversation with Luca and Juliette earlier this weekend,
one thing that did come up is that there are ways to
mitigate this through tweaks to the reporting workflow.
So Brian, I'm sorry, you're probably going to
get some GitHub issues from either me or Luca, requesting changes
when you all have the time.
And this is difficult if you don't control the reporting workflow
.
Scale is very hard.
And if we go back to the fact that, yeah,
I know, I went fully insane and I think the website
probably, you know, was going through some things.
Although interestingly, well, I'll get to it in a
minute, but remember, so growth can be a bit of
a curse, especially with a general purpose labeler.
You know, one of the things that makes this difficult is
not having a specific community that you serve makes it a little
bit harder to find and onboard volunteers.
So it's something to keep in mind.
So we had an eternal November that, well, not,
not eternal.
It lasted about five months.
We were getting, so November was 70,000 reports,
November 2024.
And interestingly, I was talking to Brian and this was actually
different for them because, because we don't deal with things
like sexual content.
We didn't have to deal with the flood of reports that
came in when video was rolled out.
So it's essentially unique to each labeler and kind of
what your labels are and what people perceive that you are covering
.
Reports began climbing, you know, right after election week or
election day.
They peaked in November 20th or so.
And then there was a steady decline over the next four to
five months.
One thing I think that helped was that Blue Sky made some
changes to the reporting workflow so that you could no longer sort
of shotgun report content to every single labeler you subscribe to
.
It forced you to be a little bit more nuanced.
And we've now settled out at a baseline of between three
to 7,000 reports a month.
It varies.
And I suspect that as we get closer to midterms
, we'll probably see a spike there as well as people
start reporting certain content to Skywatch
.
So the other thing to keep in mind is that you're
going to create new affordances.
And some of them are going to suck.
And you should undo your mistake.
So this is actually not a screenshot of Skywatch.
This labeler would put a badge on your account if you
followed one of these individuals with the theory of change being that
by making this legible, which is what labels do,
they make certain things and behaviors legible.
It would cause users to shun certain accounts and some social
pressure for folks to unfollow those people.
Unfortunately, it facilitated abuse, which is why it no
longer exists.
So you're going to make mistakes.
Some of them are going to be innocuous.
Slurs, for example, are hard to do, to
sort of automatically flag.
You'll decide one day that you want to label an unfortunately
far too common English language slur, ableist slur
, go to bed and you're going to wake up with
the francophone world mad at you because you forgot that it
's a benign vocabulary word in French.
And so you need to approach these things with some nuance and
fortunately we have the tooling to do.
So, though imperfect as it is, we do have the
tooling to determine what language a given post is in.
So you're going to want to label behavior and facts,
not identity.
And you're going to want to do it consistently with your
label definitions.
I think it should go without saying, but don't li
bel people.
Document your claims.
Be ethical.
You probably want to check your renter's or homeowner
's insurance to make sure that, if you're not a
business this is, to make sure that you have just a
sort of universal umbrella coverage in case somebody decides to hit you
with a slap lawsuit.
You are generally covered, at least from the conversations I've
had with lawyers, you are generally covered under section 230,
if -- Or not.
Or not.
Don't build up to it.
Yes.
Thank Ron Wyden for fighting a good fight.
But, you know, your mileage may vary by jurisdiction,
of course, and, you know, there's absolutely no
certainty, you know, in a climate where speech is generally
highly politicized.
But, labelers can be fun, and I, you
know, don't want to just talk about the negative parts
of it.
And so, there are affordances of labelers, and
this is not really in Skywatch's remit, but
I was testing whether or not I could use Osprey
's database to figure out who was the top Taylor Swift listener
that day using, you know, using the Clickhouse database
, and using teal.
fm's lexicon.
And I could.
And it was pretty simple.
And, you know, it's kind of funny, because
then you can kind of go from there and independently invent something
very similar to Addy, where you take the posts of
the top teal.
fm listeners of Taylor Swift tracks, and you just find
some of their posts, and now you have a feed that
you could potentially create.
Again, not really within the scope of what we do,
but I do want to sort of point out that that label
ers can be fun.
So looking a bit to the future, I want to talk
a bit about some of the tools available to make this a
little bit easier.
So if you follow me on Blue Sky, you've probably
seen a graph similar to this.
This is a graph of the sort of the Gaza Spam
accounts that have cropped up in the last two weeks.
The accounts where they are recycling the same set of usern
ames or the same set of profiles, and doing things like
reposting people so it just shows up in their mentions
.
It is generally a good indicator of inauthentic behavior
, and we're labeling it as inauthenticity.
And I know that this specific case is controversial, but this
is more by way of example.
To do this, I would never have been able to do
this or detect this at scale, just using ozone and manually
labeling things.
So we can make it suck less by using better tools.
So our automod started as a bash script, this was
two years ago.
That lasted about a year, I rewrote it in
TypeScript, and now we use Osprey.
And it's great.
We also use, it's Osprey plus ozone.
And then I use Claude and a stack of skills and
tools to help me rapidly query the database.
So Claude is not making, now you see here Cla
ude has opinions, but Claude is not making judgments or
content moderation decisions.
I've actually experimented in the past with trying to use
LLMs to assess individual pieces of content, and there
's just not enough information there, at least for the tools
I was using.
Now, there are probably more sophisticated tools, there's fine
tuning you can probably do to get your accuracy up.
But for the most part, what I find it extremely useful
for is going out, querying Ozone, querying
the ClickHouse database to put together reports that I can
then dive deeper into to see is this really a signal or
is this just something spurious?
And in this case, I have, to illustrate it,
you know, there's basically a small network of accounts via
, you know, coming via Bridgifed that are
sort of reposting what you would consider, you know
, Russian military telegram copy pasta and sort of other,
you can call it propaganda, other content aimed at various different
language groups.
It's a relatively small number, but it's there.
And, you know, if you have these tools, it
's relatively easy to find.
You know, and to that end, I've been building
some of those tools such as sidecar services to do,
you know, Poisson analysis on PDS sign ups,
you know, looking at URL over dispersion, doing some
lighting clustering and account entropy calculations to help detect that activity
.
I'll say that those are noisy signals.
So, by themselves, they shouldn't be sort of relied
upon.
So, human review is still important and correlation is still important
between sources, between signals.
And I just want to end on the note that automation is
not perfect, it can make mistakes, but it's a
lot easier than trying to find these things just using regular expressions
or just using, you know, searches on Blue Sky.
And since our users subscribe for, especially for some of the
sort of, you know, authenticity labels, it's important
for us to kind of proactively search for these things.
So, what is the future of unintegrated labelers
?
And by unintegrated labelers, I mean what Sky
watch is.
We are not affiliated with a set of PDSs or
an app view in the way that Blue Sky is or that
Black Sky is.
Now, my theory is that, because the atmosphere is growing
, that not every application or PDS admin or relay owner
is going to want to set up their own full-st
ack moderation service.
They are going to need trusted signals to action content and accounts
on their network.
A great example, excuse me, is PDS admins
.
And I want to give a shout-out to Bailey for
building Label Watcher.
If you haven't talked to Bailey about it, this is
a tool for a PDS admin or any other piece of
infrastructure to watch the firehose coming off of a set
of labelers.
And then it can either email you to tell you when a
label of interest is detected being admitted against an account on your
PDS or it can automate the takedown.
And the nice thing about that, it is up to you
as the admin to make a decision whether you trust the lab
eler enough to actually do the takedown.
And so as a result, we have this new group that
previously wasn't considered a user that is now a user.
And so Skywatch is one of the signals for catching spam
accounts created on self-hosted social and PMX social
.
So thank you, Bailey, for building this and also for
placing your trust in Skywatch.
I think we nerd sniped ourselves with that one
.
So now I do just want to talk about this a little
bit because the previous slide we talked a little bit about how
Skywatch can be used by PDS admins.
And I want to note that labelers are an informal governance
institution in a sense.
In a commons that, you know, as it grows
, it's going to lack formal governance over the whole comm
ons.
Blue sky is going to take responsibility for certain parts of it
.
Other parts of it, other folks will.
And other parts of it may be somewhat ungoverned.
We should remember that labelers are embodying sort of a
form of power and authority.
They're agents which act on the network.
And we should also note that some of these tools are incredibly
powerful surveillance mechanisms.
And so they need to be used ethically.
We need moderation.
But that, by its nature, is surveillance.
And so seeing like a moderator means trying to take behavior and
activity and making it legible.
And that creates the temptation to fence in the commons,
categorize people in behavior in a binary fashion, and then
tightly define what's right and wrong, as Dr.
K sort of had alluded to.
Or, sorry, no, that was a previous session in
here that was Dr.
Blackwell.
We don't want to fence in the commons entirely.
We want to be able to sort of set norms and set
the rules to govern the parts of the commons that we
care about that are within our jurisdiction without trying to restrict how
everyone else can act.
All right, I am very close to wrapping up then,
so thank you.
I do want to talk about the elephant in the dark forest
, because I'm an independent labeler.
If you've not read or watched the three-body problem
, the dark forest metaphor is the idea that all advanced gal
actic civilizations are locked in a bit of real-life game
theory, which the annihilation of any other civilization that they
encounter is the only correct move.
And this is kind of a tortured metaphor, because I was
going for the elephant in the room plus the dark forest,
and I don't necessarily want to cast dispersions on elephants
.
But I think we do need to talk a little bit about
Aegis.
If you don't know what Aegis was, it was
one of the first independent labelers.
The operator ended up using it for harassment, and I think
it soured Blue Sky, both the community and the company
, on the community labeler experiment for a while.
And I want to remind people that I, as an individual
, sometimes with help, sometimes with not, am running something
that has the capability of being a surveillance platform.
Labelers collapse context, and at scale, they could
potentially break the social graph.
And I think it's great that people put their trust in
me.
But by the same token, you shouldn't have to.
You shouldn't have to trust that Fane will take away
the keys if I suddenly go rogue.
And you know, it's a bad model.
In a previous life, I worked on issues of data ethics
and privacy, and the harms technology can cause inhumanitarian
response.
Jay, quoting Melvin Kranzberg yesterday, I think
was important.
These tools are what we make of them.
But we can't assume we're the only actors using them
.
And the assumption that we are acting in an ethical and just
way, I want to think that I am.
I want other people to think that I am.
But I don't want you to have to rely on just
that.
And I think that we probably have to have some conversations as
a sort of a community about how we govern the commons
and how we govern labelers.
So I would like to encourage people to come to the discourse
and start discussions there and move us towards a composable moderation
working group so we can set some standards and have some of
these discussions.
And I just want to wrap up with this quote from Lawrence
, "An open protocol that does not answer the governance question
will still receive an answer, yet it will be written by
whichever actors make themselves indispensable first." And then I do want
to finish on the note that I do think labelers are
important.
I think that they're incredibly useful.
I think we have the opportunity to shape the spaces that we
are sort of inhabiting for good.
And so even though this talk has had pessimistic notes,
I want to end on the note that you should check out
some of these labelers.
Skywatch is there, of course, but Lylabs
, SteshLab, and Black Sky are also labelers
that I use.
I find valuable, and I hope you do too.
And I think we are probably just at time, so I
don't want to run over.
But if there are any questions, I'm happy to hang
out for a little bit and answer them.
Thank you.